[Amit Varma]: At 5.30 in the morning of September 18, 2016, four terrorists attacked an Indian Army Brigade
[Amit Varma]: headquarters in Uri, near the line of control between India and Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: They threw 17 hand grenades and engaged in an armed battle for six hours, at the end
[Amit Varma]: of which all four militants were killed, but so were 17 people on the Indian side, a death
[Amit Varma]: toll that would rise as the days went by and some of the injured succumbed.
[Amit Varma]: This presented a great challenge for the Indian government.
[Amit Varma]: Earlier in the year, there had been a similar attack on Pathankot and the Indian public
[Amit Varma]: was restless and wanted retaliation of some sort.
[Amit Varma]: Narendra Modi's government had spoken like hawks on the campaign trail.
[Amit Varma]: Once they came to power in 2014, though, they had wisely made overtures towards peace.
[Amit Varma]: But the attack was a step too far.
[Amit Varma]: Something had to be done.
[Unknown]: But what?
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen, my weekly podcast on the seen and unseen effects of
[Amit Varma]: public policy.
[Amit Varma]: 11 days after the Uri attacks, the Indian government carried out what it described as
[Amit Varma]: surgical strikes against terrorist launch pads across the border in Pakistan-occupied
[Amit Varma]: Kashmir.
[Amit Varma]: In today's episode, I will discuss both the intended effect and the unintended consequences
[Amit Varma]: of the military action.
[Amit Varma]: First, the scene effect.
[Amit Varma]: The scene effect of the surgical strikes was that India had demonstrated that it would
[Amit Varma]: fight fire with fire and this was expected to be a deterrence against similar future
[Amit Varma]: attacks from Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: But is it really all that simple?
[Amit Varma]: My guest on the show today, to help me navigate some of the nuances of the surgical strike
[Amit Varma]: and to talk about some of its unseen effects, is Pranay Kotasdhane, a research fellow at
[Amit Varma]: the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay, welcome to the show.
[Guest]: Hi Amit.
[Guest]: Good to be here.
[Guest]: So first thing is, I don't like the term surgical strike itself.
[Guest]: I would prefer to call it, say something, a boring name like operational conventional
[Guest]: retaliation.
[Guest]: The reason being that surgical strike, the word itself doesn't give much information
[Guest]: to what was done.
[Guest]: So whereas when we talk about an operational conventional retaliation, why I say that is
[Guest]: because neither was this operation at a tactical level, which was happening anyways earlier.
[Guest]: So there are border action teams which go into LOC from both sides and these attacks
[Guest]: have been happening since long time back.
[Guest]: So these were happening earlier, but the difference this time was that this time many elements
[Guest]: of national power came together and there was an ownership of the attack right at the
[Guest]: highest governmental level.
[Guest]: There was a diplomatic push as well.
[Guest]: So there was an operational strategy behind it and hence it is an operational retaliation
[Guest]: and at a conventional level.
[Guest]: So I would prefer to call it operational conventional retaliation.
[Guest]: So if you consider what happened during that time, there were Uri attacks, military camp
[Guest]: was attacked.
[Guest]: So in that scenario, what would be the type of options that an Indian government would
[Guest]: have?
[Guest]: So broadly there could be three options.
[Guest]: One is that India responds to such terrorist attacks, which have been happening against
[Guest]: India for a long time with its own terrorist attacks on Pakistan.
[Guest]: That's one strategy.
[Guest]: The second one would be exercising strategic restraint and not attacking Pakistan because
[Guest]: it would lead to escalation so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And the third option would be what India did right, either using air power or using its
[Guest]: own border action teams etc. do a retaliatory strike right.
[Guest]: So these are the three broad options.
[Guest]: Now India chose the third option.
[Guest]: Now when we talk about unseen effects, none of these actions are Pareto optimal.
[Guest]: So there would be effects of each of them.
[Guest]: So what were the effects of this right?
[Guest]: That is what we are talking about.
[Guest]: So one thing, the unseen effect or which is becoming more and more seen now is that the
[Guest]: ceasefire is pretty much over.
[Guest]: There was a ceasefire in place since 2003 and because of that terrorism was sufficiently
[Guest]: down in Kashmir as well.
[Guest]: Not much intrusion happening, but now that is all gone because of this.
[Guest]: In fact, a few days back we also had a Pakistani border action team killing three Indian soldiers
[Guest]: right and beheading them etc.
[Guest]: So that is going to be a norm going in the coming days as well.
[Guest]: So there is more violence.
[Guest]: The attacks haven't stopped.
[Guest]: In fact, what has happened is instead of a terrorist attack there, what we are seeing
[Guest]: is more cross-border shelling and what it does is that these cross-border shellings
[Guest]: have been used to infiltrate militants etc. which will again increase a lot more.
[Guest]: Given that we are in a situation when our own internal political situation in Kashmir,
[Guest]: J&K is on the tenterhooks, this is really going to be a big problem right.
[Guest]: So more ceasefire violations, that means more infiltration can happen and then the terrorism
[Guest]: in the valley can again rise.
[Guest]: That is one impact.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a little bit of background on the status quo before this.
[Amit Varma]: The ceasefire that existed, was it like a tacit agreement between the two armies or
[Amit Varma]: was it something that was…
[Guest]: It was a formal agreement which was signed in 2003 which agreed that there will be a
[Guest]: cessation of hostilities on the border.
[Guest]: So if there were any cross-border firing, there was a protocol that you need to report
[Guest]: it and you need to say how many rounds were fired and things like that.
[Guest]: So that was a formal way.
[Guest]: So there were instances when the ceasefire was violated but you knew that it was violated
[Guest]: because you could report it etc. and both sides had to accept agreements etc.
[Guest]: So that was the status.
[Guest]: But after this, the amount of violence has increased substantially.
[Amit Varma]: So the intention of this, the way the rhetoric goes would be that with a strong surgical
[Amit Varma]: strike there would be some amount of deterrence that we would show that we meant business
[Amit Varma]: and they would not attack us anymore.
[Amit Varma]: But you are saying the opposite has happened.
[Amit Varma]: The ceasefire is over, violence has gone up and now it's just no holds barred.
[Guest]: So again, there are advantages to it.
[Guest]: The advantage being that out of the three options that I mentioned earlier, this is
[Guest]: the only option which probably puts a lid on the sub-conventional zone in which Pakistan
[Guest]: was operating.
[Guest]: Now it knows if there are terrorist attacks, there is a chance that India might retaliate
[Amit Varma]: in a different manner.
[Guest]: So can you explain what you mean by sub-conventional?
[Guest]: Sub-conventional just means an attack which does not involve the conventional army.
[Guest]: So it means terrorism, classic case.
[Guest]: So that was what Pakistan was doing and India didn't have its own terrorists.
[Guest]: So India was responding to it using traditional intelligence, gathering or trying to get better
[Guest]: information about where these terrorists were.
[Guest]: But that was what India's response was.
[Guest]: So this is what we call conventional threshold.
[Guest]: At which point would India use its own conventional forces?
[Guest]: Now India has brought its conventional threshold significantly down after this.
[Guest]: The intent is clear that if there are attacks of the terrorist kind also, we might respond
[Guest]: using our conventional forces.
[Guest]: So that is an advantage and yeah, there's a deterrence which is set into this.
[Guest]: So and there are a few elements which can make this strategy work.
[Guest]: For example, if this, since this act was done immediately after a terrorist strike, it is
[Guest]: seen as a retaliatory strike, right?
[Guest]: And that's an advantage because then you can drum up international support as well.
[Guest]: For instance, here US batted for what India had done.
[Guest]: So that works.
[Guest]: Second thing, it also works if the attack is done in such a way that it does not destroy
[Guest]: any core assets of the Pakistan army and it gives them a face-saving exit and it gives
[Guest]: them motivation to stop escalation, right?
[Guest]: The biggest disadvantage of all this is that it might escalate.
[Guest]: So to prevent escalation, if Pakistan army feels that, okay, I can sustain this damage,
[Guest]: but I don't want to take this on further, these are the type of conditions you would
[Guest]: want to enforce.
[Guest]: So if this attack was done, like this attack was done on a terrorist launch pad, it was
[Guest]: just 20 kilometers across the border, right?
[Guest]: In that region, there won't be no big terrorist camps, et cetera.
[Guest]: So it was just launch pads, they are destroyed.
[Guest]: So there is some motivation for Pakistan army to say, okay, let's stop, we agree there was
[Guest]: some damage done and that's all.
[Guest]: But if it were on, say a big Pakistani military establishment, then there are enough forces
[Guest]: in Pakistan, which would cause it to spiral up and the attack would be higher.
[Amit Varma]: So are you saying for the intended effects of the surgical strike to manifest, you need
[Amit Varma]: a perfect storm of circumstances to happen and without that perfect storm, the unintended
[Amit Varma]: effects will actually lead to an increase in the probability of escalation?
[Guest]: Yes, I agree.
[Guest]: So for instance, even here, right, when this attack happened, at that time, there was a
[Guest]: churn in the Pakistani military establishment as well, so Rahil Sharif was going to go out.
[Guest]: So that was also a reason because of which Pakistan army didn't retaliate as much because
[Guest]: everyone is looking for who will be, so for all said and done, the Pakistani prime minister
[Guest]: chooses the army chief.
[Guest]: So everyone was uncertain about what would the political establishment do.
[Guest]: So there wasn't as much retaliation from the Pakistani army side.
[Guest]: So it was a sort of a limbo situation.
[Guest]: But that might not work in another scenario where the Pakistani army probably just six
[Guest]: months later from now when the new army chiefs takes place, and he might have a point to
[Guest]: show and if similar things happen there, we might see a totally different result.
[Amit Varma]: And do you think another unseen effect is actually in the domestic constituency that
[Amit Varma]: now that the PM has shown his willingness to retaliate an attack of the sort, there
[Amit Varma]: is pressure on him to retaliate to all future attacks?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: That's the new normal, which has been set, right, that if so many people died, when in
[Guest]: Uri, if 18 people had died, you did something, why not now when say 28 people died or something
[Guest]: like that, right?
[Guest]: So such numbers would keep coming and it sets an expectation that India has to attack on
[Guest]: each occasion, but that is something which is a negative and an unseen negative impact
[Guest]: of such an attack.
[Amit Varma]: So the unseen effect of the surgical strikes is not just that violence has gone up because
[Amit Varma]: the ceasefire is effectively ended, but also that the probability of future escalation
[Guest]: is much, much higher.
[Guest]: Probability of future escalation is higher, yes, yes.
[Guest]: So what you would want to do in order to make this work is first do it immediately after
[Guest]: a terrorist attack to signal that we are attacking and then you would want the Pakistan army
[Guest]: to not escalate further.
[Guest]: Now, how you can do that is one thing you would not want to signal a lot of jingoism
[Guest]: which actually happened after these attacks, right?
[Guest]: So you, a DGMO declares that yes, we have attacked, we do not have any intentions of
[Guest]: taking it further, which was done in this case as well.
[Guest]: But after that, it does not happen that the entire Indian setup is going against the Pakistan
[Guest]: army and in fact, egging them on to take a bigger attack.
[Amit Varma]: But in a sense, the jingoism is coming from quarters that are outside the government's
[Guest]: control, right?
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: So that is something that the government might not control.
[Guest]: But here in this case, you would see even the government, official government rhetoric
[Guest]: was taking it to the next level, right?
[Guest]: That could have been avoided.
[Guest]: So if it is outside the government circle, yes, it can't be.
[Amit Varma]: Right, so given that the jingoism can't be avoided, let me then ask you that supposing
[Amit Varma]: you could be taken back in time, and let's say that the Prime Minister has somehow gone
[Amit Varma]: forward in time and heard this podcast and listened to your words of wisdom, and he were
[Amit Varma]: to ask you for advice, ki yaar Yuri pe attack hogaya hai, what do I do now?
[Amit Varma]: Given that the jingoism and all is not controllable, what would your advice be?
[Amit Varma]: What's your strategic and tactical advice?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I personally feel that it is important to signal that India has multiple options.
[Guest]: And hence, this particular strike was a good option to indicate that we were not only limited
[Guest]: to engaging in sort of intelligence gathering or the conventional means of countering terrorism,
[Guest]: but we have another option with us.
[Guest]: So it's a good signal to do.
[Guest]: So given that option was not there at all before, full national power, backed effort
[Guest]: for countering terrorism, I would have probably done given the same advice.
[Guest]: But now that it is already done, now we would probably want to explore more options rather
[Guest]: than having the same response.
[Guest]: Yeah, so out of the three options that we discussed earlier, right, one option was,
[Guest]: if India is always at the receiving end of terrorism, can India have its own terrorists?
[Guest]: Now that is a very dangerous option, right, you wouldn't want to do that, because that
[Guest]: neither restricts Pakistan's options, neither gives any semblance of peace on the Indian
[Guest]: side.
[Guest]: And in fact, with the situation that Kashmir is in, we are actually, the situation will
[Amit Varma]: even worse.
[Guest]: So out of the three options, you'd count that out completely.
[Guest]: Yeah, right.
[Guest]: The second option would be strategic restraint, right.
[Guest]: So withstand Pakistan's attacks, probably formulate a diplomatic response, get US, Saudi
[Guest]: Arabia and China, which are big powers and which can take Pakistan's side to come forcefully
[Guest]: against Pakistan.
[Guest]: Now, US did, but it is unlikely that Saudi Arabia and China would go against Pakistan.
[Guest]: Probably the worst, the best we can expect is they would not go out taking Pakistan's
[Guest]: side in diplomatic fora.
[Guest]: So that is the second option.
[Guest]: This is something that we'd been doing from a long time, right.
[Guest]: So there were no other options left.
[Guest]: So in that sense, when this was done, now there is an uncertainty which is introduced
[Guest]: and veterans rest on uncertainty.
[Guest]: So in that way, this option indicates to the Pakistani side that India is sort of more
[Amit Varma]: arrows in its quiver.
[Amit Varma]: But do you think he also reduces the options for himself by almost painting himself into
[Amit Varma]: a corner?
[Amit Varma]: Because when this next strike comes, there'll be pressure on him to respond similarly forcefully?
[Guest]: Yes, that is the other side of it.
[Amit Varma]: That's another unseen effect of this.
[Guest]: So now going ahead, possibly what would happen is they would need to develop more options
[Guest]: for doing this so-called surgical strike itself, right.
[Guest]: And then defining what are the levels at which these options would need to be taken.
[Guest]: So does an attack on a military establishment also constitute a grave enough danger to go
[Guest]: and attack?
[Guest]: The various levels of attacks would have to be decided.
[Guest]: And that's something that we've gotten ourselves into that situation.
[Guest]: So there's no point in debating whether we could have taken ourselves into an alternate
[Guest]: universe.
[Guest]: But given that we are in this situation, we would have to make do with it and explore
[Guest]: more options within this operational conventional retaliation, which can signal to Pakistan
[Guest]: that terrorism won't be tolerated.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay, thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: It's a pleasure talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: When it comes to managing a conflict, it often happens that all the options before you are
[Amit Varma]: bad and you need to pick the least bad option.
[Amit Varma]: When the country was crying out for a strong retaliation from India, the surgical strike
[Amit Varma]: seemed an apt response.
[Amit Varma]: But while the seen effect was that it ostensibly sent a strong message across the border and
[Amit Varma]: quietened the bloodlust within India, the unseen effect was that the ceasefire of more
[Amit Varma]: than a decade was broken and violence actually went up.
[Amit Varma]: So did the possibility of escalation.
[Amit Varma]: All the other options before us were quite unappetizing as well, but it helps to know
[Amit Varma]: what the unseen effects of this one were, especially as cross-border violence has actually
[Amit Varma]: gone up after these surgical strikes.
[Amit Varma]: The India-Pakistan conflict, it seems, will never come to an end, but this episode of
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen has.
[Unknown]: Next week on The Seen and the Unseen, Amit Verma will be talking to Prithviraj Mukherjee
[Unknown]: about maximum retail price.
[Amit Varma]: For more, go to seenunseen.in.
[Guest]: Don't forget to subscribe.